Nine Whys

Make the Purpose of Your Work Together Clear (20 min.)

    If you want to build a ship, don’t drum up people to collect wood and don’t assign them tasks and work, but rather teach them to long for the endless immensity of the sea. Antoine de Saint-Exupery

What is made possible? With breathtaking simplicity, you can rapidly clarify for individuals and a group what is essentially important in their work. You can quickly reveal when a compelling purpose is missing in a gathering and avoid moving forward without clarity. When a group discovers an unambiguous shared purpose, more freedom and more responsibility are unleashed. You have laid the foundation for spreading and scaling innovations with fidelity.

Five Structural Elements – Min Specs

1. Structuring Invitation

    Ask, “What do you do when working on ______ (the subject matter or challenge at hand)? Please make a short list of activities.” Then ask, “Why is that important to you?” Keep asking, “Why? Why? Why?” up to nine times or until participants can go no deeper because they have reached the fundamental purpose for this work.

2. How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed

    Unlimited number of groups
    Chairs for people to sit comfortably face-to-face; no tables or equipment needed.

3. How Participation Is Distributed

    Everyone has an equal opportunity to participate and contribute

4. How Groups Are Configured

    First pairs, then groups of four, then the whole group (2-4-All)

5. Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation

    Each person in a pair is interviewed by his or her partner for 5 minutes. Starting with “What do you do when working on ____?” the interviewer gently seeks a deeper answer by repeating the query: “Why is that important to you?” Switch roles after 5 minutes. 10 min.
    Each pair shares the experience and insights with another pair in a foursome. 5 min.
    Invite the whole group to reflect by asking, “How do our purposes influence the next steps we take?” 5 min.
