Celebrity Interview

Reconnect the Experience of Leaders and Experts with People Closest to the Challenge at Hand (35-60 min.)

What is made possible? You can enable a large group of people to connect with a leader or an expert (the celebrity) as a person and grasp the nuances of how that person is approaching a challenge. With a well-designed interview, you can turn what would otherwise be a passive, often boring presentation into a personal narrative that is entertaining, imparts valuable knowledge, and reveals the full range of rational, emotional, and ethical/moral dynamics at play. You can often turn the interview into an invitation to action, drawing out all the elements needed to spark the participant group’s imagination and encourage cohesive action.

Five Structural Elements – Min Specs

1. Structuring Invitation

    Invite the celebrity to let go of his or her formal presentation or speech and answer the harder questions on everyone’s mind in a casual “talk show” format
    Invite group members to listen, see the person behind the celebrity, and write down questions with colleagues

2. How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed

    Interviewer and celebrity in the front of the room where everyone can see and hear the interaction (lapel microphones, bar stools, or living-room furniture recommended)
    Unlimited number of people in a space where they can sit to view the interview and later form small groups (theater-style seating is OK)
    3-by-5-inch cards to collect questions generated via 1-2-4

3. How Participation Is Distributed

    Part one, interview: everyone has an equal opportunity to listen
    Part two, questions: everyone has an equal opportunity to engage with one another to formulate questions

How Groups Are Configured

    Whole group for interview
    Individuals, pairs, small groups for 1-2-4 to generate questions

Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation

    Interviewer welcomes and introduces the celebrity and topic to be discussed. 3 min.
    Interviewer asks questions that the audience would be expected to ask (both humor and gravity are appropriate). 15–30 min.
    Invite participants to generate additional questions in a 1-2-4 conversation and then on 3-by-5-inch cards. 5–10 min.
    Interviewer sifts the cards, looking for patterns and asking additional questions to the celebrity. 5–10 min.
    Interviewer makes closing comments, thanks the celebrity. 1 min.
