1. Structuring Invitation

    Invite the members of a core working group with a shared purpose to create a map of their network and to decide how to expand and strengthen it
    Ask them to name the people they are currently working with and those they would like to include in the future (i.e., people with influence or expertise they need to achieve their purpose)
    Invite them to “weave” connections in the network web to advance their purpose

2. How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed

    A long open wall with a tapestry paper or multiple flip-chart pages
    2-by-2-inch Post-it notes in at least 8 colors
    Bold-tip black pens (e.g., Sharpies)

3. How Participation Is Distributed

    Everyone involved in the core working or planning group is included
    Everyone has an equal opportunity to contribute

4. How Groups Are Configured

    1-2-4-All to generate the names of all the key groups
    Everyone together to generate the names of people in the network and construct the map

5. Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation

    Create a legend of all the key groups in the network needed to achieve your purpose and assign a Post-it color or symbol for each. 5 min.
    Every core group member prints clearly his or her name on a Post-it. Put the Post-its in a group in the center of the wall. 5 min.
    Ask all core group members, “What people do you know that are active in this work?” Tell them to create a Post-it with each of their names. Ask them to arrange the Post-its based on each person’s degrees of separation from each design group member. 10 min.
    Ask all core group members, “Who else would you like to include in this work?” Invite them to brainstorm and create Post-its for the other people they would like to include. Ask them to build the map of Post-its as a web with a core and periphery structure (mimicking the actual and desired spread of participation). Individuals is this group may your your friends' friends.  New legend categories and colors may be needed as the webbing expands. 10 min.
    Tell the core group to step back and ask, “Who knows whom? Who has influence and expertise? Who can block progress? Who can boost progress?” Ask them to illustrate the answers with connecting lines. 15 min.
    Ask the group to devise strategies to: 1) invite, attract, and “weave” new people into their work; 2) work around blockages; and 3) boost progress. 10 min.
