Conversation Café

Engage Everyone in Making Sense of Profound Challenges (35-60 min.)

What is made possible? You can include and engage any number of people in making sense of confusing or shocking events and laying the ground for new strategies to emerge. The format of the Conversation Café helps people have calm and profound conversations in which there is less debating and arguing, and more listening. Sitting in a circle with a simple set of agreements and a talking object, small groups will engage in rounds of dialogue with little or no unproductive conflict. As the meaning of their challenge pops into focus, a consensual hunch is formed that will release their capacity for new action.

Five Structural Elements – Min Specs

1. Structuring Invitation

    Invite all the participants to gather in small groups to listen to one another's thoughts and reflect together on a shared challenge 

2. How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed

    Unlimited number of 5 to 7 chairs around small tables
    Talking object (e.g., talking stick, stone, or art object)
    Markers and one or two pieces of flip-chart paper per table optional

3. How Participation Is Distributed

    Everyone is included
    Everyone has an equal opportunity to contribute

4. How Groups Are Configured

    Mixed, diverse groups of 5–7 participants

5. Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation

    State the theme of the conversation, usually in the form of a question
    Explain there will be four rounds of conversation at every table, two first rounds using a talking object, the third one as open conversation, and a final round with the talking object. Give the duration of each round.
    Distribute the talking objects
    Read the six Conversation Café agreements. See text in Collateral Material below.
    Ask for someone at each table to volunteer as the host. The host is a full participant whose role is to gently intervene only when a participant visibly fails to observe one of the six agreements, most frequently talking on and on
    First round with the talking object: each person shares what he or she is thinking, feeling, or doing about the theme or topic. 1 min. per person
    Second round with the talking object: each person shares thoughts and feelings after having listened to everybody at the table. 1 min. per person
    Third round: open conversation (option to use talking object). 20–40 min.
    Fourth round with the talking object: each member shares “takeaways.” 5–10 min.
