15% Solutions

Discover and Focus on What Each Person Has the Freedom and Resources to Do Now (20 min.)

You cannot cross the sea merely by standing and staring at the water. – R. Tagore

What is made possible? You can reveal the actions, however small, that everyone can do immediately. At a minimum, these will create momentum, and that may make a BIG difference. 15% Solutions show that there is no reason to wait around, feel powerless, or fearful. They help people pick it up a level. They get individuals and the group to focus on what is within their discretion instead of what they cannot change. With a very simple question, you can flip the conversation to what can be done and find solutions to big problems that are often distributed widely in places not known in advance. Shifting a few grains of sand may trigger a landslide and change the whole landscape.

Five Structural Elements – Min Specs

1. Structuring Invitation

    In connection with their personal challenge or their group’s challenge, ask, “What is your 15 percent? Where do you have discretion and freedom to act? What can you do without more resources or authority?”

2. How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed

    Unlimited number of groups.
    Chairs for people to sit in groups of 2-4; no tables required.

3. How Participation Is Distributed

    Everyone is included
    Everyone has an equal opportunity to contribute

4. How Groups Are Configured

    First alone
    Then in pairs or small groups

5. Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation

    First alone, each person generates his or her own list of 15% Solutions. 5 min.
    Individuals share their ideas with a small group (2 to 4 members). 3 min. per person and one person at a time
    Group members provide a consultation to one another (asking clarifying questions and offering advice). 5 to 7 min. per person and one person at a time

WHY? Purposes

    Move away from blockage, negativism, and powerlessness
    Have people discover their individual and collective power
    Reveal bottom-up solutions
    Share actionable ideas and help one another
    Build trust
    Remember unused capacity and resources (15 percent is always there for the taking)
    Reduce waste
    Close the knowing-doing gap

Tips and Traps

    Check each item to assure that it is within the discretion of the individual
    Be ready for BIG things to emerge via the butterfly effect
    Reinventing the wheel is OK
    Each 15% Solution adds to understanding of what is possible
    Clear, common purpose and boundaries will generate coherence among many 15% Solutions
    Make it a routine to ask for 15% Solutions in meetings (15% Solutions are otherwise commonly unnoticed and overlooked)
    While introducing the idea, tell a story about a small change made by an individual that sparked a big result