Wise Crowds

Tap the Wisdom of the Whole Group in Rapid Cycles (15 min. per person)

Every journey has a secret destination of which the traveler is not aware. – Martin Buber

What is made possible? Wise Crowds make it possible to instantly engage a small or large group of people in helping one another. You can set up a Wise Crowds consultation with one small group of four or five people or with many small groups simultaneously or, during a larger gathering, with a group as big as one hundred or more people. Individuals, referred to as “clients,” can ask for help and get it in a short time from all the other group members. Each individual consultation taps the expertise and inventiveness of everyone in the group simultaneously. Individuals gain more clarity and increase their capacity for self-correction and self-understanding. Wise Crowds develop people’s ability to ask for help. They deepen inquiry and consulting skills. Supportive relationships form very quickly. During a Wise Crowds session, the series of individual consultations makes the learning cumulative as each participant benefits not only from being a client but also from being a consultant several times in a row. Wise Crowds consultations make it easy to achieve transparency. Together, a group can outperform the expert!

Five Structural Elements – Min Specs for Small Wise Crowds

1. Structuring Invitation

    Ask each participant when his or her turn comes to be the “client” to briefly describe his or her challenge and ask others for help.
    Ask the other participants to act as a group of “consultants” whose task it is to help the “client” clarify his or her challenge and to offer advice or recommendations.

2. How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed

    Groups of 4 or 5 chairs arranged around small tables or in circles without tables
    Paper for participants to take notes

3. How Participation Is Distributed

    Everyone is included
    Everyone has an equal amount of time to ask for and get help
    Everyone has an equal opportunity to offer help

4. How Groups Are Configured

    Groups of 4 to 5 people
    Mixed groups across functions, levels, and disciplines are ideal
    The person asking for help, the “client,” turns his or her back on the consultants after the consultation question has been clarified.

5. Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation

Each person requesting a consult (the client) gets fifteen minutes broken down as follows:

    The client presents the challenge and request for help. 2 min.
    The consultants ask the client clarifying questions. 3 min.
    The client turns his or her back to the consultants and gets ready to take notes
    The consultants ask questions and offer advice, and recommendations, working as a team, while the client has his or her back turned. 8 min.
    The client provides feedback to the consultants: what was useful and what he or she takes away. 2 min.

WHY? Purposes

    Generate results that are enduring because each individual and the group produced them together without “outside expertise”
    Refine skills in giving, receiving, and asking for help
    Tap the intelligence of a whole group without time-consuming up and sideways presentations
    Liberate the wisdom and creativity that exists across disciplines and functional silos
    Replace boring briefings and updates with an effective and useful alternative
    Actively build trust through mutual support and peer connections
    Practice listening without defending
