Impromptu Networking

Rapidly Share Challenges and Expectations, Build New Connections (20 min.)

What is made possible? You can tap a deep well of curiosity and talent by helping a group focus attention on problems they want to solve. A productive pattern of engagement is established if used at the beginning of a working session. Loose yet powerful connections are formed in 20 minutes by asking engaging questions. Everyone contributes to shaping the work, noticing patterns together, and discovering local solutions.

Five Structural Elements – Min Specs

1. Structuring Invitation

    Ask, “What big challenge do you bring to this gathering? What do you hope to get from and give this group or community?”

2. How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed

    Open space without obstructions so participants can stand in pairs and mill about to find partners

3. How Participation Is Distributed

    Everybody at once with the same amount of time (no limit on group size)
    Everyone has an equal opportunity to contribute

4. How Groups Are Configured

    Pairs
    Invite people to find strangers or colleagues in groups/functions different from their own

5. Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation

    In each round, 2 minutes per person to answer the questions. 4-5 min. per round
    Three rounds

WHY? Purposes

    Initiate participation immediately for everyone provided the questions are engaging
    Attract deeper engagement around challenges
    Invite stories to deepen as they are repeated
    Help shy people warm up
    Affirm individual contributions to solutions
    Emphasize the power of loose and new connections
    Suggest that little things can make a big difference

Tips and Traps

    Use one challenge question and one give-and-take question
    Ask questions that invite participants to shape the direction of their work together
    Use Impromptu Networking before you begin meetings and conferences
    Use bells (e.g., tingsha) to help you shift participants from first, to second, to third rounds
    Ask questions that are open-ended but not too broad
    Invite serious play
    Have three rounds, not one or two
    If you choose to share output, do it carefully and preserve confidentiality
