Improv Prototyping

Develop Effective Solutions to Chronic Challenges While Having Serious Fun (20 min. per round)

What is made possible? You can engage a group to learn and improve rapidly from tapping three levels of knowledge simultaneously: (1) explicit knowledge shared by participants; (2) tacit knowledge discovered through observing each other’s performance; and (3) latent knowledge, i.e., new ideas that emerge and are jointly developed. This powerful combination can be the source of transformative experiences and, at the same time, it is seriously fun. Participants identify and act out solutions to chronic or daunting problems. A diverse mix of people is invited to dramatize simple elements that work to solve a problem. Innovations represented in the Improv sketches are assembled incrementally from pieces or chunks that can be used separately or together. It is a playful way to get very serious work done!

Five Structural Elements – Min Specs

1. Structuring Invitation

    Invite participants to identify a frustrating chronic challenge in their work, then to playfully experiment, invent, and discover better ways to address the challenge by acting out the situation and possible solutions.

2. How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed

    An open space or stage at the front or in the middle of a room
    If needed, props for the scene or scenes to be offered
    Small clusters of chairs to accommodate all participants

3. How Participation Is Distributed

    Everyone is included either as players or observers
    A few volunteers to be “players”
    Everyone else acts as observers and evaluators, then co-creative players

4. How Groups Are Configured

    One small group of players on “the stage”
    All others, the observers, in small groups in front or around the stage

5. Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation

    Explain what will be done and describe the sequence of steps. 2 min.
    Set the stage by describing the scenario that will be acted out and the various roles. 3 min.
    Players on stage enact the scene. 3–5 min.
    Each small observer group debriefs with 1-2-4-All to identify successful and unsuccessful “chunks” from the scene that they just observed. 5 min.
    Each observer group then pieces together the successful chunks into a new prototype and volunteers from within the group act out the new prototype for their own group only. 5 min.
    Participants from one of the observer groups who judge that they have an improved prototype volunteer to come on stage and enact their version in front of the whole group. 3–5 minutes.
    Continue with as many rounds as necessary to arrive at one or more prototypes that are good enough to put into practice.

WHY? Purposes

    Enable people to act their way into new thinking: Improv Prototyping is a rehearsal for real life
    Break a task that seems daunting into smaller pieces
    Engage and focus everyone’s imagination on solving messy challenges
    Break through frozen or resistant behaviors
    Create an engaging and fun alternative to dry or unproductive training
    Work across functional and disciplinary barriers
    Help people learn from peers that have behaviors that solve the problem

Tips and Traps

    Be as inclusive as possible: invite everyone in different roles to join in
    Consider creating three supporting roles depending on the complexity of the scenario: stage manager, creative director, and facilitator.
    Replay scenes that do not capture the imagination or generate new ideas
    Invite people to let go of assumptions and biases by putting themselves in the shoes of others, e.g., doctor plays nurse and nurse plays doctor, student plays professor
    Invite creative director to gently redirect the players as needed

