Wise Crowds for Large Groups (1 hr.)

Five Structural Elements – Min Specs for Large Groups

1. Structuring Invitation

    Ask the participant who is the “client” to describe his or her challenge, the status of any work in progress, and the advice or help he or she is looking for
    Ask the other participants to act as a group of “consulting teams” whose task it is to help the “client” clarify his or her challenge and to offer advice or recommendations.

2. How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed

    One chair for the client in the front of the room
    Screen and projector only if absolutely indispensable
    Three chairs for the primary consultants in the front of the room
    Groups of 5–8 chairs arranged around small tables, or in circles without tables, for all the satellite consulting teams
    Paper for participants to take notes
    Index cards at each table to write recommendations
    Microphones for the client and primary consultants

3. How Participation Is Distributed

    The client has a specific amount of time to present and ask for help
    The primary consulting team has a fixed amount of time to offer help
    Everyone else on each consulting team has an equal opportunity to contribute help during the balance of the time, which is also fixed

4. How Groups Are Configured

    Individual client
    One group of 2 to 3 primary consultants
    Any number of satellite groups of 5 to 7 people as consulting teams
    Mixed groups across functions, levels, and disciplines are ideal

5. Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation

Each person requesting a consult (the client) gets one hour broken down as follows:

    The client presents his or her consulting question and selects the 2-4 individuals who will form the primary consulting team. The primary consultants move and occupy their chairs in the front of the room. 2 min.
    The client presents the challenge and request for help. 10 min.
    The primary consultants pose clarifying questions to the client, using microphones so that all participants can hear them. 10 min.
    The client turns his or her back to the primary consultants and gets ready to take notes.
    The primary consultants jointly form advice and recommendations, working as a team while the client has his or her back turned. Microphones are used so that all others in the room can follow their discussion. 7 min.
    Every satellite consulting team separately critiques the work of the primary consulting team and generates its own recommendations for the client. 10 min.
    While the satellite teams work, the client turns around and uses this ten-minute period to discuss with the primary consulting team.
    Do one round to gather the critiques from the satellite teams first and then a second round to gather their recommendations. Gather only one comment or recommendation per team, with no repeats. It may be useful to ask the satellite teams to write their recommendations for the client on 3-by-5-inch index cards. 10 min.
    The client provides feedback to the consultants: what was useful and what he or she takes away. 2 min.
    Invite a full-group conversation reflecting on the process, so what, and now what. 5 min.

NOTE: The timing for each step can be adjusted depending on the complexity of the problem and the size of the group, but it is essential to stick strictly to the schedule and not let discussions drag beyond the time set. It is always better to have a second round instead.