What, So What, Now What? W³

Together, Look Back on Progress to Date and Decide What Adjustments Are Needed (45 min.)

What is made possible? You can help groups reflect on a shared experience in a way that builds understanding and spurs coordinated action while avoiding unproductive conflict. It is possible for every voice to be heard while simultaneously sifting for insights and shaping new direction. Progressing in stages makes this practical—from collecting facts about What Happened to making sense of these facts with So What and finally to what actions logically follow with Now What. The shared progression eliminates most of the misunderstandings that otherwise fuel disagreements about what to do. Voila!

Five Structural Elements – Min Specs

1. Structuring Invitation

    After a shared experience, ask, “WHAT? What happened? What did you notice, what facts or observations stood out?” Then, after all the salient observations have been collected, ask, “SO WHAT? Why is that important? What patterns or conclusions are emerging? What hypotheses can you make?” Then, after the sense making is over, ask, “NOW WHAT? What actions make sense?”

2. How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed

    Unlimited number of groups
    Chairs for people to sit in small groups of 5-7; small tables are optional
    Paper to make lists
    Flip chart may be needed with a large group to collect answers
    Talking object * (optional)

3. How Participation Is Distributed

    Everyone is included
    Everyone has an equal opportunity to contribute at each table
    Small groups are more likely to give voice to everyone if one person facilitates and keeps everybody working on one question at a time

4. How Groups Are Configured

    Individuals
    Groups of 5-7
    Whole group
    Groups can be established teams or mixed groups

5. Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation

    If needed, describe the sequence of steps and show the Ladder of Inference (see below). If the group is 10–12 people or smaller, conduct the debrief with the whole group. Otherwise, break the group into small groups.
    First stage: WHAT? Individuals work 1 min. alone on “What happened? What did you notice, what facts or observations stood out?” then 2–7 min. in small group. 3–8 min. total.
    Salient facts from small groups are shared with the whole group and collected. 2–3 min.
    If needed, remind participants about what is included in the SO WHAT? question.
    Second stage: SO WHAT? People work 1 min alone on “Why is that important? What patterns or conclusions are emerging? What hypotheses can I/we make?” then 2–7 min. in small group. 3–8 min. total.
    Salient patterns, hypotheses, and conclusions from small groups are shared with the whole group and collected. 2–5 min.
    Third stage: NOW WHAT? Participants work 1 min. alone on “Now what? What actions make sense?” then 2–7 min. in small group. 3–8 min. total.
    Actions are shared with the whole group, discussed, and collected. Additional insights are invited. 2–10 min.

 
WHY? Purposes

    Build shared understanding of how people develop different perspectives, ideas, and rationales for actions and decisions
    Make sure that learning is generated from shared experiences: no feedback = no learning
    Avoid repeating the same mistakes or dysfunctions over and over
    Avoid arguments about actions based on lack of clarity about facts or their interpretation
    Eliminate the tendency to jump prematurely to action, leaving people behind
    Get all the data and observations out on the table first thing for everyone to start on the same page
    Honor the history and the novelty of what is unfolding
    Build trust and reduce fear by learning together at each step of a shared experience
    Make sense of complex challenges in a way that unleashes action
    Experience how questions are more powerful than answers because they invite active exploration

Tips and Traps

    Practice, practice, practice … then What, So What, Now What? will feel like breathing
    Check with small groups to clarify appropriate answers to each question (some groups get confused about what fits in each category) and share examples of answers with the whole group if needed
    Note that the expression of emotions can be observed as a "What" (e.g., "many people were smiling and laughing" rather than suggesting people were "happy")
    When sharing with the whole group, collect one important answer at a time.  Don't try to collect answers from each group or invite a long repetitive list from a single group.  Seek out unique anwsers that are full of meaning.  
    Intervene quickly and clearly when someone jumps up the Ladder of Inference
    Don't jump over the So What? stage too quickly.  It can be challenging for people to link observations directly to patterns.  It is the most difficult of the three Whats.  Use the Ladder of Inference as a reminder of the logical steps "up the ladder" from observations to action.  
    Appreciate candid feedback and recognize it
    Build in time for the debrief—don’t trivialize it, don’t rush it
    Make it the norm to debrief with W3, however quickly, at the end of everything
