Discovery & Action Dialogue (DAD)

Discover, Invent, and Unleash Local Solutions to Chronic Problems (25-70 min.)

Live the questions now and perhaps without knowing it you will live along someday into the answers. – Rainier Maria Rilke

What is made possible? DADs make it easy for a group or community to discover practices and behaviors that enable some individuals (without access to special resources and facing the same constraints) to find better solutions than their peers to common problems. These are called positive deviant (PD) behaviors and practices. DADs make it possible for people in the group, unit, or community to discover by themselves these PD practices. DADs also create favorable conditions for stimulating participants’ creativity in spaces where they can feel safe to invent new and more effective practices. Resistance to change evaporates as participants are unleashed to choose freely which practices they will adopt or try and which problems they will tackle. DADs make it possible to achieve frontline ownership of solutions.

Five Structural Elements – Min Specs

1. Structuring Invitation

    Invite people to uncover tacit or latent solutions to a shared challenge that are hidden among people in their working group, unit, or community. Ask anybody interested in solving the problem to join a small group and participate in a DAD. In the group, ask seven progressive questions:

    How do you know when problem X is present?
    How do you contribute effectively to solving problem X?
    What prevents you from doing this or taking these actions all the time?
    Do you know anybody who is able to frequently solve problem X and overcome barriers? What behaviors or practices made their success possible?
    Do you have any ideas?
    What needs to be done to make it happen? Any volunteers?
    Who else needs to be involved?

2. How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed

    DADs take place in a local setting or unit
    Groups may be standing or sitting around a table
    Paper, flip chart, or software/projection equipment needed to record insights and actions

3. How Participation Is Distributed

    Facilitator introduces the questions
    Everyone who is around is invited to join and be included
    Everyone in the group has an equal opportunity to contribute

4. How Groups Are Configured

    Facilitator works with a partner to serve as a recorder
    Group size can be 5–15 people
    Diversity in roles and experience is an important asset

5. Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation

    State the purpose of the initiative being discussed and the DAD and invite brief round-robin introductions. 5 min.
    Ask the 7 questions one by one in the order given in the Invitation. Address them to the whole group and give everyone the opportunity to speak to each question. Make sure your recorder captures insights and action ideas as they emerge—big ones may emerge when you least expect it. 15–60 min.
    Ask your recorder to recap insights, action ideas, and who else needs to be included. 5 min.
